vargoTEDx.md, before:


### A talk given at the [TEDx UWMadison](http://www.ted.com/tedx/events/12377) event November 1, 2014###

#Our Urban Nature#
What was the first domesticated animal? 

What if the answer is US?  What if domestication -- settlement, society, even cities are part of our evolution as humans? Part of what makes us human?

---------------------------------
Perhaps it's fitting that DaVinci's drawing and the notes that accompany it came from a Roman architect and Civil Engineer. 

Darwin was one of the first to suggest that we showed some physical signs of domestication. And there is little argument that in terms of our social evolution  moving into settlements, working together and forming stronger social ties was a milestone. 

Eventually domestication led to us exhibit a tendency to settle and stay in one place. One feature of our brains that is most amazing is their ability to envision situations and circumstances that we’re not actually experiencing. We can put ourselves in other people’s shoes. And at some point we began to think about the future. Our understanding of how actions in the present could be connected to outcomes down the road is another reason we began to settle. We began to make the most of the land and other human resources around us and we invested time in making place. 

It’s not a realization that’s so easy to swallow. And, as a recent Science article on the topic pointed out, we don’t like to think of ourselves as ‘tame’.

And yet, it might be the source for some of the most amazing advances in our species’ existence. 

-----------------

For 10,000 years we’ve been living in settlements. And for just as long we’ve been taking advantage of their benefits. They are the same benefits we talk about today when we talk about cities – exchange of ideas, goods, specialization. 

Looking at a history of our development and settlement we see a trend of continually increasing settlement into, what today we would refer to as cities. 

And we see that massive and lasting innovations are coupled with that urban movement.  

The first cities helped develop agriculture, accrued wealth and resources and eventually even stores of food. 

Things we never intended to create, but which are still with us today, government, politics, rights, writing, and trade emerged as we continued to live in settlements. 

In the last 2000 years we see some of the cities we’re most familiar with and start to see some of the city planning touchstones that I learned about in graduate school.  But the trend toward urban living has been a long time coming, and today it is taking off. 

If we look at the number of ‘urban dwellers’ we see tremendous growth over the last 300 years and we often hear that today half of the world’s population lives in cities. 3.5 billion people.  

The spike in the urban population coincides with a couple other important trends that I am interested in from an environmental and health perspective. You may be familiar with climate change’s infamous hockey stick graph. It depicts atmospheric concentrations of green house gases and shows the massive impact that human use of fossil fuels is having. 

__Recent growth parallels global environmental issues, and the scariest part is that the next century is forecast to be the most urban yet.__ It took us 100 centuries to reach 3.5 billion now and we’re expected add 5 billion in the next 100 years (century). 
As we talk today about designing change, it’s important to note that all of the development that has taken place from Mesopotamia til now will be equaled by urban development in the next century. That means not only new cities, but rebuilding the places we already have.  

With that much construction and place making yet to happen, __decisions around and in urban places do not have to lead us to collapse. They can be take us in a completely different direction__.

--------------
What should future settlements look like?
Can 7 billion people live like this?

Dividing all the arable land on the planet up yields about 4 tenths of an acre per person, that’s a little more than an acre and a half for a family of four. Which may sound like a lot at first. 

But consider that under this scenario, everyone is on their own for food. There is not much space left for offices, stores, let alone much room for things like biodiversity. Not likely to happen

--------------
The model of the American suburb has been widely subsidized and today is being adopted by reapidly growing economies in countries like India and China. This is happening while, in this country, we're spending a lot of money and effort to remedy some of the ills the suburbs have helped create over the last 60 years. 

With the rates at which they consume valuable farmland and create huge energy demands and dependancies, they are not likely sustainable. 

-------------
At the same time we want to avoid the pitfalls that come with rapid urbanization. But it is importnat to remember that density by itself is not urbanism. And the characteristics that make this a slum (limited access to water and sanitation, lack of secure tenure, poor housing quality) are not innate to being urban. 

---------
Today, they is no such thing as a sustainable city. We need new models of urban living.

At a large level cities must understand and embrace their relationships to natural material and energy inputs and environmental quality.  

On a smaller scale, that means places must be well thought out, attractive and empowering. That means much more than just physical designs that are human-scaled and high quality. It involves creating enabling, encouraging, and legitmitzing governance and civic processes for urban residents to take part in. 

Can cities be supportive of surrounding and connected environments and species, while providing basic levels of quality for all?

If so, then working to create great urban lives may be the way forward for ensuring quality lives for future generations.

--------

It would be easy to look at city living and global environmental trends and to think urban living is the source of our problems, but it doesn’t have to be.  I believe that being mindful of our urban nature can actually be the key to helping us solve some of the problems we face. 

----------

The first thing we need is to redefine the relationship of urban and the environment. Historically cities have reinforced the dominance of man over nature.  Cities have tended to reinforce an idea of human dominance over nature. We level hills, pave over farm land, and put streams into pipes. Rivers has even been reversed to do our bidding. 

New thinking must emphasize the interdependence of cities and the larger natural world. One way to do this is to being thining about how urbanism can be integrated into existing disciplines. We already see this happening in the emerge of young fields like environmental sociology, landscape urbanism, and urban ecology. 

----------

In a more concrete way urbanism has to be more nuanced that the urban or rural classification that the 3.5 billion number would lead us to believe. As you move from left to right on this transect, you see increasing degrees of urbanism. 

These are characterized by more intense use of the land. So urbanism is not just more people living close together but is  the close proximity of many activities and services. There is also no one way it should look. Urban places should be diverse and high quality. They have to be interesting places that people want to spend time in, take ownership of, and continue to improve. And they are also highly connected, which means more than just how close you are to things and people, it has to do with whether or not you can actually get to them. 

There are also several environmental advantages to higher degrees of urbanism. The most obvious has to do with land consumption - where a more urban pattern of settlement can serve as an important conservation strategy.  

----------

We also see this urban advantage in energy and related pollution as well. You can see here how carbon footprints of indiviudals and households are much lower in the green cities of the Eastern US. There folks live in smaller homes which require less heating and cooling, and they drive less and have fewer cars. 

They green islands of the cities are surrounded by intense energy use in the red suburbs. Which is not to say that no one can live in suburbs, but surely they can not be the types of place from a majority of people on the planet as they are in this country.

In this way urbanism provides us with an important demand side strategy - of which we have few. Overwhelmingly we focus on supply side technologies, however if we develop more fuel efficient vehicles just so we can drive further we really haven't gotten anywhere. Urbanism can help make our substantial investments and innovations in renewable energy technology more real - today. 

----------

It has this effect because of something David Owen referes to as embodied efficiency in his book Green Metropolis. He uses this example to explain it. 

If you find yourself living on the red star location with single family home in either direction and eventually small commercial districts where you can accomplish daily tasks, it's unlikely that you'll be able to get much done without getting into your car. If you are only willing to walk this far, you'll have to do a lot of borrowing from neighbors to take care of things. This type of setting has been described as requiring a gallon of gas to get a gallon of milk. 

---

Consider an alternative with a higher degree of urbanism; increased density with vertical living and more intense mixed land use. Talking the elevator to ground you'll be able to walk to twice the number of destinations that you had access to with your car before. 

----------

Additionally, urbanism helps us make th best use of money spent on crucial urban infrastructures.  Consider how quickly the space of one such infrastructure (roads) is consumed when everyone is dependent on driving their own car. The investments in roads is complemented by urban arngements that encourage walking, cycling and transit. 

----------

One powerful aspect of urban design is it can have impact on behaviors as modified environments. Cities influence our behavior. Even people who preferred to live in single family housing but lived in an urban layout walked more than those who lived in single famy homes

----------

Data on how our brains have evolved to function more effecently with higher degrees of urbanism. Here participants were given a task of choosing which mailbox was closer. Participants were more quickly able to make the correct decision in the more connected hypothetical setting perhaps suggesting that the same environmental advantage would prefer existence in an urban setting.

----------

So you know what I'm going to say next... We need to build cities on the moon.

No. I'm kidding, but whenever we face huge challenges we evoke missions to the Moon. And there's one lunar mission that most of you are familiar with - Apollo 13. To put it mildly... they had a problem. The were running low on fuel, life support systems were failing and they were headed in the wrong direction. They had to get creative to help themselves and they had to solve their problems in the easiest, most efficient ways. They ended up using something called a free return trajectory, which made use of the forces around them, the gravity and the inertia of the Moon, to turn them 180 degrees and point them back toward Earth. 

-----------

And the metaphor seems particularly appropriate now, while we're going in the wrong direction on the global environment. But if we can use our species' momentum toward cities we might be able to create new solutions that point as in a new direction.

Commit message:

added links to videos and coverage

vargoTEDx.md, after:


### A talk given at the [TEDx UWMadison](http://www.ted.com/tedx/events/12377) event November 1, 2014###

## [video of the talk can be found here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ERjTXo5M0bY)

##[ audio of the talk with slides here](https://vimeo.com/116662482)

## coverage here [from Nelson](http://nelson.wisc.edu/news/story.php?story=2059) and on [Smithsonianmag.com](http://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/humans-are-becoming-city-dwelling-metro-sapiens-180953449/?no-ist)

#Our Urban Nature#
What was the first domesticated animal? 

What if the answer is US?  What if domestication -- settlement, society, even cities are part of our evolution as humans? Part of what makes us human?

---------------------------------
Perhaps it's fitting that DaVinci's drawing and the notes that accompany it came from a Roman architect and Civil Engineer. 

Darwin was one of the first to suggest that we showed some physical signs of domestication. And there is little argument that in terms of our social evolution  moving into settlements, working together and forming stronger social ties was a milestone. 

Eventually domestication led to us exhibit a tendency to settle and stay in one place. One feature of our brains that is most amazing is their ability to envision situations and circumstances that we’re not actually experiencing. We can put ourselves in other people’s shoes. And at some point we began to think about the future. Our understanding of how actions in the present could be connected to outcomes down the road is another reason we began to settle. We began to make the most of the land and other human resources around us and we invested time in making place. 

It’s not a realization that’s so easy to swallow. And, as a recent Science article on the topic pointed out, we don’t like to think of ourselves as ‘tame’.

And yet, it might be the source for some of the most amazing advances in our species’ existence. 

-----------------

For 10,000 years we’ve been living in settlements. And for just as long we’ve been taking advantage of their benefits. They are the same benefits we talk about today when we talk about cities – exchange of ideas, goods, specialization. 

Looking at a history of our development and settlement we see a trend of continually increasing settlement into, what today we would refer to as cities. 

And we see that massive and lasting innovations are coupled with that urban movement.  

The first cities helped develop agriculture, accrued wealth and resources and eventually even stores of food. 

Things we never intended to create, but which are still with us today, government, politics, rights, writing, and trade emerged as we continued to live in settlements. 

In the last 2000 years we see some of the cities we’re most familiar with and start to see some of the city planning touchstones that I learned about in graduate school.  But the trend toward urban living has been a long time coming, and today it is taking off. 

If we look at the number of ‘urban dwellers’ we see tremendous growth over the last 300 years and we often hear that today half of the world’s population lives in cities. 3.5 billion people.  

The spike in the urban population coincides with a couple other important trends that I am interested in from an environmental and health perspective. You may be familiar with climate change’s infamous hockey stick graph. It depicts atmospheric concentrations of green house gases and shows the massive impact that human use of fossil fuels is having. 

__Recent growth parallels global environmental issues, and the scariest part is that the next century is forecast to be the most urban yet.__ It took us 100 centuries to reach 3.5 billion now and we’re expected add 5 billion in the next 100 years (century). 
As we talk today about designing change, it’s important to note that all of the development that has taken place from Mesopotamia til now will be equaled by urban development in the next century. That means not only new cities, but rebuilding the places we already have.  

With that much construction and place making yet to happen, __decisions around and in urban places do not have to lead us to collapse. They can be take us in a completely different direction__.

--------------
What should future settlements look like?
Can 7 billion people live like this?

Dividing all the arable land on the planet up yields about 4 tenths of an acre per person, that’s a little more than an acre and a half for a family of four. Which may sound like a lot at first. 

But consider that under this scenario, everyone is on their own for food. There is not much space left for offices, stores, let alone much room for things like biodiversity. Not likely to happen

--------------
The model of the American suburb has been widely subsidized and today is being adopted by reapidly growing economies in countries like India and China. This is happening while, in this country, we're spending a lot of money and effort to remedy some of the ills the suburbs have helped create over the last 60 years. 

With the rates at which they consume valuable farmland and create huge energy demands and dependancies, they are not likely sustainable. 

-------------
At the same time we want to avoid the pitfalls that come with rapid urbanization. But it is importnat to remember that density by itself is not urbanism. And the characteristics that make this a slum (limited access to water and sanitation, lack of secure tenure, poor housing quality) are not innate to being urban. 

---------
Today, they is no such thing as a sustainable city. We need new models of urban living.

At a large level cities must understand and embrace their relationships to natural material and energy inputs and environmental quality.  

On a smaller scale, that means places must be well thought out, attractive and empowering. That means much more than just physical designs that are human-scaled and high quality. It involves creating enabling, encouraging, and legitmitzing governance and civic processes for urban residents to take part in. 

Can cities be supportive of surrounding and connected environments and species, while providing basic levels of quality for all?

If so, then working to create great urban lives may be the way forward for ensuring quality lives for future generations.

--------

It would be easy to look at city living and global environmental trends and to think urban living is the source of our problems, but it doesn’t have to be.  I believe that being mindful of our urban nature can actually be the key to helping us solve some of the problems we face. 

----------

The first thing we need is to redefine the relationship of urban and the environment. Historically cities have reinforced the dominance of man over nature.  Cities have tended to reinforce an idea of human dominance over nature. We level hills, pave over farm land, and put streams into pipes. Rivers has even been reversed to do our bidding. 

New thinking must emphasize the interdependence of cities and the larger natural world. One way to do this is to being thining about how urbanism can be integrated into existing disciplines. We already see this happening in the emerge of young fields like environmental sociology, landscape urbanism, and urban ecology. 

----------

In a more concrete way urbanism has to be more nuanced that the urban or rural classification that the 3.5 billion number would lead us to believe. As you move from left to right on this transect, you see increasing degrees of urbanism. 

These are characterized by more intense use of the land. So urbanism is not just more people living close together but is  the close proximity of many activities and services. There is also no one way it should look. Urban places should be diverse and high quality. They have to be interesting places that people want to spend time in, take ownership of, and continue to improve. And they are also highly connected, which means more than just how close you are to things and people, it has to do with whether or not you can actually get to them. 

There are also several environmental advantages to higher degrees of urbanism. The most obvious has to do with land consumption - where a more urban pattern of settlement can serve as an important conservation strategy.  

----------

We also see this urban advantage in energy and related pollution as well. You can see here how carbon footprints of indiviudals and households are much lower in the green cities of the Eastern US. There folks live in smaller homes which require less heating and cooling, and they drive less and have fewer cars. 

They green islands of the cities are surrounded by intense energy use in the red suburbs. Which is not to say that no one can live in suburbs, but surely they can not be the types of place from a majority of people on the planet as they are in this country.

In this way urbanism provides us with an important demand side strategy - of which we have few. Overwhelmingly we focus on supply side technologies, however if we develop more fuel efficient vehicles just so we can drive further we really haven't gotten anywhere. Urbanism can help make our substantial investments and innovations in renewable energy technology more real - today. 

----------

It has this effect because of something David Owen referes to as embodied efficiency in his book Green Metropolis. He uses this example to explain it. 

If you find yourself living on the red star location with single family home in either direction and eventually small commercial districts where you can accomplish daily tasks, it's unlikely that you'll be able to get much done without getting into your car. If you are only willing to walk this far, you'll have to do a lot of borrowing from neighbors to take care of things. This type of setting has been described as requiring a gallon of gas to get a gallon of milk. 

---

Consider an alternative with a higher degree of urbanism; increased density with vertical living and more intense mixed land use. Talking the elevator to ground you'll be able to walk to twice the number of destinations that you had access to with your car before. 

----------

Additionally, urbanism helps us make th best use of money spent on crucial urban infrastructures.  Consider how quickly the space of one such infrastructure (roads) is consumed when everyone is dependent on driving their own car. The investments in roads is complemented by urban arngements that encourage walking, cycling and transit. 

----------

One powerful aspect of urban design is it can have impact on behaviors as modified environments. Cities influence our behavior. Even people who preferred to live in single family housing but lived in an urban layout walked more than those who lived in single famy homes

----------

Data on how our brains have evolved to function more effecently with higher degrees of urbanism. Here participants were given a task of choosing which mailbox was closer. Participants were more quickly able to make the correct decision in the more connected hypothetical setting perhaps suggesting that the same environmental advantage would prefer existence in an urban setting.

----------

So you know what I'm going to say next... We need to build cities on the moon.

No. I'm kidding, but whenever we face huge challenges we evoke missions to the Moon. And there's one lunar mission that most of you are familiar with - Apollo 13. To put it mildly... they had a problem. The were running low on fuel, life support systems were failing and they were headed in the wrong direction. They had to get creative to help themselves and they had to solve their problems in the easiest, most efficient ways. They ended up using something called a free return trajectory, which made use of the forces around them, the gravity and the inertia of the Moon, to turn them 180 degrees and point them back toward Earth. 

-----------

And the metaphor seems particularly appropriate now, while we're going in the wrong direction on the global environment. But if we can use our species' momentum toward cities we might be able to create new solutions that point as in a new direction.
